And interestingly, this idea of sharing best practices, finding things to do at every level
together seems, I don't know, more important than ever, probably, given the state of the
incredible state of the world in 2024.
So the premise here is that since 2008 or so, we've been doing great in open source,
and most of us have been very busy.
Who makes their money, supports their family, full-time, always, only open source?
Right?
I'm used to, I think all of my clients are still open source, but I'm doing something
slightly different now.
So we've all done great with open source.
My open source origin story is in the Drupal community.
But we have forgotten how special and weird we are, and what is most valuable and interesting
about us is not obvious to everyone.
And I think that we've been so busy winning and succeeding and, you know, having agencies
with 120% bookings over any 18-month horizon.
We forgot to tell people what an economy of plenty is, what sharing your best ideas
with the smartest people you know can do, and so on.
And we are not getting all of the opportunities to win business for ourselves or do good in
the world that we could, right?
That's about where we are.
So very, very briefly, my name is Jim.
I co-founded a company called Open Strategy Partners, and we work with technology agencies,
product companies, and open source projects to communicate clearly about the wonderful,
complicated, interesting stuff that all of us do in open source.
So, right, that's me.
Matthias, please come and introduce yourself.
As I've already said, I'm Matthias Burt Lesniak, and I'll hold this myself, and you
can click yes.
I am living outside of Oslo in Norway.
I do have a wife, and I do have two kids.
Hi.
And I have been using Type 3 since 2003, and I always say that the first time I used
Type 3, I crashed the installation, and I think that's a really important thing to know
for beginners in any CMS that you start by learning, and all of the people who are very
good right now are people who didn't know anything when they started.
So everyone's been in your boat, newbies.
I'm in the Type 3 Association Board, and you're skipping a little bit faster.
I thought I had half an hour for that slide.
I'm in the Type 3 Association Board.
I'm an evangelist at Tuju, and I'm also consulting for Open Strategy Partners as well, and you
can find me on the bird site and on the mammoth sites and other places as well.
So, but of course, when I do presentations about Type 3, I do the next slide.
And what is Type 3?
Well, you know, if you look at it from the top, you know, Type 3 is a PHP-based CMS.
Huh.
It is also free and open source.
It's also community-driven, and it's also backed by an association.
In addition to that, it has a long history.
That actually fits to all of these.
CMS is right.
And just to underscore that, let's just take a look at how similar we actually are.
And for another presentation, I looked at Drupal and their core dependencies, composer
dependencies.
They have 54.
In Type 3, we have a few more.
We have a different way of thinking around what should be in the core of the CMS.
We can take that fight outside, but I think, you know, whatever happens, we have 98 core
dependencies, and what is really striking is that we have 33 in common.
You know, this is the stuff that makes us different.
This is the same stuff, right?
We're made of the same kind of stuff, and that puts things in a different light when
you think about our four CMSs, right?
In the open source world, we're often very good at bashing each other.
We're saying, you know, oh, no, you shouldn't choose Joomla or Drupal.
Type 3 is best.
And no.
One of the reasons why we founded the Open Website Alliance is because the most important
choice that a client can make today is to choose open source, because when you look
at open source, we have more in common than we have differences.
And then the choice of which CMS you need depends on what needs you have, what agencies
are available in your area, those kind of things.
And that means we have so much to win by collaborating.
Jam.
So, on to the substance of the talk.
Let's remember what we're about, and remember, and our aim by the end of the day is to encourage
all of us to get back out in the world and tell everyone we know again.
So we're going to talk about the fundamental idea of freedom as open source as freedom.
We're going to talk about the pragmatic reasons why, if it's an applicable use case, you really
should give open source a fair chance.
You should choose and use open source for completely pragmatic, non-moral, non-ethical
reasons.
There were really good reasons.
My old job was very involved in telling those stories, and I pulled out a bunch of old slides
to talk about this part.
Then Matthias is going to help us shift gears into a real idealistic space where we can
do my favorite part about open source, which is making the world a tiny bit better every
day at a scope that I hadn't considered until I started talking with him a couple of years
ago.
I mean, if you want the tabloid version of this presentation, it's Barbenheimer, right?
And I'm Barbie, and he's Ken.
No, he's...
Yes, he's Ken.
Yeah.
He's Oppenheimer.
So, I do all of the pink stuff, and he does all of the dark stuff.
Oh, is that... is that how it goes?
Okay.
So, really, really interesting.
On Friday, you were at the European...
What was the thing?
The EU Open Source Policy Summit.
Right.
And four or five times during the day, they said, Open Source is one, which is awesome,
right?
We won, which is great, except, you know, and as I just said, I've been making a decent
living at this since about 2008.
All of us are doing all right with this Open Source stuff.
He sent me this article a year ago, almost exactly a year ago, and I got really, really,
really, really upset.
First of all, I was part of the crew that came into Australia and helped Australia get
on Drupal.
Australia has a thing called GovCMS, which is Open Source, which does incredible work.
It enables 133 departments, multiple state governments, generates work and expertise
in the Australian economy, and somebody at Deloitte got the right meeting with somebody
in the Ministry of Something in Australia, where they decided that they needed personalization
and that since the current GovCMS infrastructure couldn't do it, therefore, they were going
to rip and replace it with an Adobe solution.
And the Australian government entered contracts with Adobe for more than 80 million Australian
dollars and spent at least 36 million with Adobe on personalization that was illegal
under Australian law because the data retention required to run the personalization wasn't
allowed.
All while Australia has an incredible success story of Open Source winning, right?
So we have to tell our stories and we have to tell our colleagues and we have to be really
up front about who we are and what we do.
So that was the kickoff.
Then Matthias and I both, I got very angry.
That's my, unfortunately, still my go-to.
And I decided to put, like, that we needed to start telling people.
So Matthias and I went on the circuit for six or eight months last year.
I did a bunch of buffs and a bunch of early versions of this talk and Matthias did versions
of a really cool, completely different talk.
And now we've smashed them together.
So, right.
So we've been complacent.
I think the story picks up.
Oh, no, it's still my year.
Right?
So here's one of my oldest slides.
A gentleman named Jim Alchin in 2001 said that Open Source was an intellectual property
destroyer and he couldn't think of anything worse for the software business, which is
hilarious for all of us paying our rent with this stuff, right?
And we used to think that that was cute and funny, obviously, but we've been busy and we've
been making good things.
We've been taking what we do for granted, right?
And it's special and it's different and it runs on fundamentally different economic models
and still generates incredible value, right?
So we need to be loud and proud and we need to evangelize about it.
So, time to get back to the basics.
And basically, I mean, we've been complacent.
We've been, yes, successful, but, yeah, that thing, you know, free isn't beer, we say about
free and open source software.
We've been maybe focusing too much on the beer, too much on just being free on the beach
or something relaxed.
But we've forgotten these really important questions about, you know, the other things
that open source has.
Like open source is not only free as in beer.
Yeah, I know that comes as a shock to many of you, but it's also free as in free speech,
for example.
You can do whatever you want.
Hello, you can say and do whatever you want.
Open source is a threat to anyone who doesn't want you to do whatever you want.
Hey, what is this picture?
Crayons or, well, we also have choice, right?
With open source.
Open source introduces choice into the software business.
When you have choice, something really interesting happens.
Open source projects do not work the same way as other software projects do.
That's why I have a slide here with the Gingerbread Man.
Hello, this is Gingerbread Man.
Do you know the Gingerbread Man fairy tale?
Hands up.
So some people don't know it.
That gives me a chance to tell it, right?
Which was what I wanted.
The Gingerbread Man, there's this man and this wife who lives in a house in the forest
and they don't have any children.
Maybe they don't know how to make them.
Maybe they have some kind of reason for not having them, but they really, really, really,
really want them.
And so the wife gets this idea that she can bake a Gingerbread Boy for them, which is like,
yes, I know, super.
We should all go home and do that.
What happens when she opens the oven and wants to take out the Gingerbread Boy?
He springs out alive and he runs out the door.
Lots of stuff happens.
Whom?
He meets lots of people.
That's what happens with an open source project as well.
When someone open sources their project, it runs out.
It gets a life of its own.
And if you know the fairy tale, you know that the Gingerbread Boy dies in the end.
He gets eaten by a fox, not Firefox.
We love Firefox, but it's...
Yeah.
There is another side to open source projects as well that we might have forgotten a little bit.
And that is the puppy side of open source.
We have to care for our open source projects and for open source maintainers and everything
that is open source.
Because in the end, this freedom that we have been living with and enjoying also comes with responsibility.
Open source is not only freedom, it is also responsibility.
Thank you.
So, casting myself into my old job, which I loved very much,
free and open source software gives us some really unique value propositions to work with
and make good business choices as good business people.
And it all starts with what we call the four freedoms.
And I guess everyone in this room is basically familiar with the four freedoms.
But I want to go over this for a moment.
You're free to use our software for anything.
Other people are free to do what they want and run out of the oven and get eaten by the fox.
You're free to understand what you're getting and you're free to have anyone else confirm for you
that it does what it says and that there's no tricks and traps in it.
And that's really powerful.
And you're allowed to make it into exactly what you need to solve the exact problem that you have.
And that enables a ton of people at every scale.
The largest businesses like Pfizer who do unique things every day at a scale that we can't even imagine.
They use open source to solve running their business.
And the smallest businesses doing something that no one else does in the world,
they have the same software and the same ability to solve problems uniquely,
which is awesome.
And we're allowed to make that ideal solution and then pass it on to other people.
Sell it, share it, run services on it, whatever we want,
so that its value can go and multiply.
And this virtuous circle gives us all really incredible superpowers.
So when selling open source projects, we love to tell people,
hey, the old way of selling open source was something like,
oh, you can totally make it cheaper because you save money over here.
And being responsible with money is important.
You need to set the expectation that this has a license fee of zero dollars or euros.
But frankly, your superpower there is that when you save money on the license fees,
you can reallocate it into making a better project.
So every IT project, every software project has a lot of costs.
None of it's free.
If you tell people it's free, they're gonna be disappointed in the end, right?
But you have this incredible possibility to invest in choosing exactly an even
better color of blue than you could afford if you were paying a license fee.
You can hire new people, you can train new people, and, right,
you're only paying money for the features that you need that aren't quite there yet, right?
But you get, in all of our projects cases, millions of hours of coding and
contribution work for free, just as your baseline to get started with, right?
Plus, putting together all four freedoms, you have the freedom to choose people working in
your local economy so that your money stays where you live.
And you should be able to control your own data and make it safe and private as it should be.
You should also be able to define what that software does and
when on your schedule and not when Microsoft deems it possible.
And yes, on your time.
My dad used to tell this story.
And I'm not sure why because he's not in the restaurant business, but
he would tell a story about if you open a restaurant,
you should own the building that you have your restaurant in.
Because if you rent a building from somewhere, you build up this business,
you make great spaghetti, people come by, they love it, they know where you are.
At some point, your landlord is going to turn around and come back and say,
I love that your place is doing so great.
I also love your spaghetti.
I'm also doubling your rent, right?
And since the restaurant business happens to be about location and
people walking in and having a habit of going places, you're kind of stuck with that.
And if you move, you're going to lose, potentially most of your business have to start again, right?
So I don't want my government, for example,
to rent the space that they do citizen services with for
me from Oracle or IBM or whomever, who then turns around and say,
by the way, that thing that you've been using, right?
Or I don't know, don't build your business on other people's stuff as much as that's possible.
That thing that you've been using, nobody else wants it.
So we're sunsetting it at the end of the year, but
you can buy this other new version, which costs twice as much next year, right?
So open source gives us a power to live in our own houses, right?
To own the bricks where we work and give control.
I think the security debate is, well, as old as this slide, who remembers this?
But still today, now here's the weird thing.
All the people I know in here, I know we've had this conversation in the 2000 and
zeros with people, but this stuff still comes up today.
And that's the point of this talk, right?
There are new generations of people, new generations of business people, new people
coming up without any of our experiences and we have to go and pull this stuff out
and create sensible resources about it.
And that's also, I mean, just to bring that up.
We have a talk about it later today.
And by going around and thinking that we have won this again and
just looking at each other in the open source business,
we're really, I mean, putting nails into our own coffin.
Owen is going to talk about a small software company called Adobe.
That has a lot of marketing money later today.
And there are things that they can absolutely not do.
And if you get into the situation where you're actually owned by somebody else
because they own your bricks, you are losing your freedom.
And you'll soon be without beer.
Usually in the political world, we think software as two black and white things.
Either the government should build, run, own everything because the government knows best.
Right?
And then there's another side of politics where they say that is absolutely bullshit.
That private sector should own, run everything and whatever the government does
should just be to pay money to them so that it runs.
Right?
None of those are actually open source.
They're both proprietary solutions.
The government can keep secrets and so can the private sector.
Right?
They don't have to publish their code.
They don't have to have open source licenses.
Open source can do something amazing to this picture.
We are underutilizing that ability of seeing open source as a part of civil society.
Civil society is what we as people do together, whether it's going to acquire and singing in that choir
or it's building software or it's trying to help other people.
That happens in the civil society realm of the world.
That is community.
Community is a really important thing and you can have the government pay money into community projects to support them.
Private sector can pick up what is being built by the open source community and make a business out of it.
They can put money back into it, code back into it.
By thinking community around software, we don't just enable one product,
but we enable anyone to make any number of products and business plans and earn any money in any way.
We're talking too little about this.
Here's another picture that I like.
This is a desert, everyone.
What's the thing you think about in a desert?
Well, it's sand.
Sand, sand, sand.
For as long as the eye can see, right?
Well, the desert is a picture of proprietary software.
It's monolithic.
It's a mono culture.
It's monotechnical.
The guy who owns the watering hole in the desert, well, if he's your friend,
you can go there as much as you want to, but he's also the one who decides when you're no longer friends
and when you have to pay more, you still have to go to that watering hole and get your water, right?
That is how it functions.
You might feel free.
You might feel that it's warm, but you are dependent on someone.
Open source, on the other hand, is the jungle.
And, well, the jungle is not a mono culture.
There are lots of different plants, lots of different things going on here.
Any plant can grow up at any time, succeed or not, who knows.
It wouldn't have been here if all of these plants were fighting each other.
This is a picture of collaboration, but also a picture of interdependence.
We're all dependent on each other just like the Drupalian type of three dependencies.
If one of our shared dependencies, you know, isn't anymore, we both have a problem.
So we have a shared responsibility around that.
Everyone has access, but we have to not only take care of ourselves,
we have to take care of others as well.
And another really interesting thing is this is sand, right?
Like in the desert.
And what do we do when we want to stop a desert from growing?
Any ideas?
Exactly, we plant trees.
The roots of the trees, the life, the community that we bring in,
it doesn't only hold the grains, but it also holds water.
It creates organic matter.
That means that the desert will not come back, right?
It changes the environment totally because of community.
And now, Mr. McGuire here will say a few words about how this changes our way of thinking about government involvement.
Yes, yes.
So governments have the power to change the world.
They have a certain amount of money that they can invest in,
and there are some traditional ways to do that.
But I think that the other side, that building a bridge across a given geographical feature will make it possible to have more commerce
or more tinder dates or something, and they think that society will be better for it.
They think the economy will be better for it.
They can plan it, they can execute it, they can build it when the money is spent, it's spent,
and the thing works or it doesn't, we find out when it happens.
The same goes for they can choose to vaccinate people.
They might choose to vaccinate people in another country so that they have better outcomes in that country,
and then maybe change migration patterns, create economic welfare and growth in another place.
Unfortunately, a lot of governments also choose to do sort of the opposite with their money.
In all of these cases, however, whatever amount of money is spent on whatever number of physical things
and necessary or not, this is reality.
There's this really interesting other way to build government infrastructure.
It doesn't cure diseases and so on per se, but when governments invest in open source digital infrastructure,
build the perfect government ministry organizational website, right?
Give it to the next one, give it to the next one, give it to the next one.
Australia's done this very, very successfully and it's not the only place.
It's a terrific model and it's this crazy thing where the money that a government spends once
can infinitely improve and become infinitely, theoretically infinitely more valuable.
The more departments who use that solution, the more value it becomes and the return on investment can grow kind of forever.
It is also entirely reasonable to expect to be able to solve problems in your own country, in another country,
and share this goodness and it's an incredible superpower and it's not just theoretical,
and it's not just sort of government websites versus spending money on vaccines.
There's this incredible real world effect that our work has.
The UK IT supplier map before 2010 looked like this
and these dozen dots or so, London, Reading, Brighton and so on, correspond exactly to HP headquarters,
IBM headquarters, Adobe headquarters, Oracle headquarters and so on in the UK.
And not only that, but they are the foreign headquarters, mostly for American companies, right?
So the UK government was sending a ton of money into these companies.
Now, they had this incredible program in the UK, the digital transformation,
and they did a whole number of things that have had very, very positive benefits.
I had the incredible privilege of being at a talk from the Cabinet Office,
the guy who ran this program inside the Cabinet in the UK, and he gave me these slides originally.
So they did a whole number of things.
They created this procurement system that works quite well.
They did a whole bunch of things, but fascinatingly they said any government IT project with a budget of less than 100 million pounds,
they made a whole smaller businesses could apply for them.
So SMEs got access to government projects under 100 million pounds,
and they said if an open source solution can do the job, there is a preference for open source solutions in these procurements.
There was a bunch of other stuff, but smaller companies were allowed to bid on government projects,
and open source got a leg up based on functionality, not on marketing, right?
So a few years later, the government procurement map looked like that.
Don't drop your mind.
Okay. Now, there's a bunch of wonderful stuff about this.
First of all, all of this UK tax money, there's clearly some of it still going out of the country into large corporations,
but think how many digital agencies, right?
And in all over the map, even in Europe, right?
Even in the Republic of Ireland, oddly.
But right, look how much, imagine how much money the UK government spends on IT,
and how that now goes into local people, local economies, new jobs and training and skills for the UK.
It's an incredibly powerful story.
An open source, right?
It wouldn't be possible without the open source piece of that.
So I believe the next line is, it was a dark and stormy night at the Type 3 Association.
When the telephone suddenly rang.
Yeah, we have somewhat more modern telephones in Type 3 as well, just to say that,
yes, the telephone rang, and it was the government of Rwanda.
They had 250 Type 3 installations that needed upgrading.
Well, they definitely rang the right number, right?
We can do that, but Type 3 doesn't make websites.
Agencies make websites.
How are we going to solve this?
Well, we could have called one of our larger agencies and said, hey, you guys do it.
You know, travel down there.
This is money for you.
You've been supporting us.
We're nice.
Well, and you could imagine, you could imagine in some circumstances and with any version of proprietary software
that some large foreign company would come in, set up an office, do the work,
pull millions out of the country, and potentially leave again.
That's actually how it's done a lot of the time.
We often call it foreign aid, actually, but it's not so much aid.
It's basically an established business that open a local office and then they export all of their earnings.
And they use closed solutions with this wonderful vendor lock-in that we all love to create financial independence.
We've seen this before, right?
We've seen this a hundred years ago.
This, ladies and gentlemen, is colonists and exploitative.
It's just got new clothes on.
It's still the same way of working.
So we couldn't do that.
What we decided to do instead in type of three, and this is unique to open source,
is we decided to use our community to create independent local business and expertise in Rwanda to serve their government.
So you've got an independent financial cycle where the government pays agencies in the country, they serve their government.
It all happens there.
You're building something instead of just locking them in,
and they have all of the freedom they want to do anything else with that expertise as well.
And Daniel who's sitting here has written a wonderful article and we have a report about how that happened,
that we also have some paper copies of, but basically people from type of three agencies in Europe
spent a week in Rwanda training people.
They came back a few times and did the same thing.
And the result of that is we soon have 300 type of three open source based websites running everything in the Rwanda government,
everything from the president's office down to local governments within the country.
It's all done by Rwandans, for Rwandans, it's an opportunity for Rwanda.
And the training, the community people trained both government employees and people from the local economy,
so they created agency skills in Kigali as well.
So yes, both government and local agencies were trained, that was for you online, that was what Jam said.
And to put this into a more tabloid phrasing, what we did was we took a democratic and not-for-profit open source project
and we used that to support sustainable and independent local business, right?
Right?
That's what Australia does when they invest in open source, that's what Germany does when they invest in open source,
that's what governments should do when they work with open source.
They support their ideological foundation in free speech, democracy, peaceful coexistence, hello,
that's a really, really good selling point for open source, who can do that with proprietary exploitative software, eh?
Go ahead.
So, yeah, this is the GovCMS link, do you want to say something about that Jam?
Or should I just continue ranting? I'm going to rant more.
Okay, because basically what we created and what they have created is locally led, non-exploitative, anti-colonial software
and they've created community, they've created civil society.
Civil society, everyone won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2022.
Go and look at the reasons for why that prize was given to two organizations and one person.
The last sentence includes civil society, open source organizations are civil society organizations.
They contribute the same way as other civil society organizations too, the welfare of the world.
Now, what next?
Right, so we looked at our origin story and the four freedoms that define us
and then worked up through this scale of how things can be better using open source, thinking open source
and expanding those practices well beyond the scope of just software into the real impact that we have on the world.
So what we really think is important is that our values, right, are the values of a healthy society
and this is not the future we were promised, this is not the happy place that I wanted to be in as a grown-up
and so we have the chance to, we have the chance, we are cross-border international communities of practice.
We are models of democracy in a time when democracy seems to be under attack, right?
So at this point, I think the call to action is look at things like the Cyber Resilience Act,
help governments who are willing to listen, get things right, help your friends in business and elsewhere
make the right choices about software and the open source economy is not taught in schools.
Recently I spent, I had a 45-minute appointment at an embassy talking about a project similar to the one in Randa.
Well, I have 45 minutes. I spent 30 of those minutes trying to convince them that open source actually works.
We need to tell people that open source works and why.
Yes, yes we do.
He agrees.
So, and in that spirit, welcome to the Open Web Alliance Dev Room for the day. We'll take a very short break.